"Lego Minecraft" is a Lego theme based on the sandbox video game "Minecraft".

==Style==
A Lego "Minecraft" set themed around a snowy setting.

The earlier "Micro World" sets feature a group of four interlocking scenes that can be rearranged, with two having a removable surface with caves containing ores, underground rivers, and a minecart track, it also includes characters which can be moved around like normal Lego.

The later sets feature brick-built locations with primitive brick types (in order to remain faithful to Minecraft's blocky aesthetics), often on base plates raised by bricks, to allow for inter-connectivity with other sets. These sets are all of a minifigure scale, with custom moulds for the character heads, tools and certain body parts (for example the Creeper, which consists of primarily a single moulded piece for its torso and legs).

==Development==

===Microworlds===
When asked about Lego Minecraft's beginnings, Mojang chief executive officer Carl Manneh stated that "it was one of the first things we talked about when we started Mojang." Mojang started the project on the Lego CUUSOO program, which required ten thousand signatures for the project to be approved. With the strong support of the "Minecraft" community, the signature objective was achieved within a matter of days, and the development of the Lego Minecraft set commenced after Lego reviewed the project. The first Micro-World set was released on June 6, 2012. Portions of the sales proceeds went to a charity of Lego's choosing. On July 17, 2013, it was announced that two additional Micro-World sets would be added to the "Minecraft" theme based on the "Nether" and "Village" areas of the game. A fourth Micro-World set exploring "The End" region was released in summer 2014. Six minifigure scale sets including the First Night, the Mine, the Ender Dragon, Crafting Box, the Farm and the Cave were made available in November 2014.

===Minifigures===
Minifigure sized LEGO sets were then later announced in 2014. The prototypes of Creepers, mine carts, and sheep were all being developed as part of a Co-Build Project announced after MineCon, a fan convention. The initial group of minifigre-scaled sets were released from November to December 2014.

In May 2018 three new sets in Minecraft universe were announced by the LEGO Group featuring the Skull Arena, Skeleton Attack and Bedrock Adventures. They suppose to come out in August 2018.

==Reception==
Mashable listed the first Lego Minecraft set as a creative gift for the 2012 Christmas season. "Forbes" magazine noted in December 2012 that the original set was sold out due to its great popularity.
