"Minecraft: Story Mode" is an episodic point-and-click graphic adventure video game developed and published by Telltale Games, based on the sandbox video game "Minecraft". The first five episodes of the game were released between October 2015 through March 2016, and an additional three episodes were released as downloadable content in mid-2016. The game was released for Microsoft Windows, macOS, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Wii U, Nintendo Switch, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Android, iOS, Apple TV, and browser through Netflix. The game was developed in association with Mojang, the original developer of "Minecraft". A retail version was released in December 2016.

The game follows the episodic format that Telltale Games used for its titles: "The Walking Dead", "The Wolf Among Us", "Tales from the Borderlands", and "Game of Thrones". The game centers around a new character named Jesse, who can be either male or female, as they and their allies attempt to save their world by defeating the Wither Storm.

A second five-episode season was released by Telltale in July 2017, continuing the story from the first season and influenced by players' choices made during that season.

==Gameplay==
"Minecraft: Story Mode" is an episodic interactive comedy-drama point-and-click graphic adventure video game. It was released as a number of episodes similar to Telltale Games' other games. Players can collect items, solve puzzles, and talk to non-player characters through conversation trees to learn about the story and determine what to do next. Decisions that the player makes affect events in both the current episode and later episodes. However, "Minecraft: Story Mode" is intended to be a family-friendly title, unlike Telltale's previous games, which tend to carry more mature or emotional overtones (including the death of major characters). As such, the decisions are intended to be pivotal and emotional but not to involve mature imagery or themes.

==Synopsis==
===Setting===
"Minecraft: Story Mode" takes place in an interpretation of the world of "Minecraft". The main character Jesse is a passionate newbie Minecraft player who sets out on a journey with friends within the world of "Minecraft" to find The Order of the Stone (Gabriel the Warrior, Ellegaard the Redstone Engineer, Magnus the Rogue, Soren the Architect and Ivor the Potion Brewer and Enchanter), five legendary adventurers who saved the "Minecraft" world. The game includes settings that are normally difficult to access from within "Minecraft", including the Nether and The End. Other main characters within the "Minecraft: Story Mode" world include Jesse's friends Petra (voiced by Ashley Johnson),

===Plot===
"This is a broad overview of the plot. Certain decisions made by the player will alter details of specific events."

====Season 1 (2015–16)====

===== "The Order of the Stone" (Episode 1) =====
Jesse (Patton Oswalt or Catherine Taber) and his/her friends, Olivia (Martha Plimpton) and Axel (Brian Posehn), along with his/her pet pig Reuben (Dee Bradley Baker), prepare for the annual EnderCon building competition, which they lose every year to a rival team called the Ocelots. This year, they build a fireworks machine decorated as one of three "Minecraft" mobs, which threatens to win this year. Ocelot member Aiden (Matthew Mercer) becomes extremely jealous, and in his rage accidentally releases a flow of lava nearby, scaring off Reuben and threatening to destroy the fireworks machine. Jesse either goes after Reuben alone and leaves Axel and Olivia to save the fireworks machine, or brings Axel and Olivia, which results in the fireworks machine going up in flames. Jesse (if he/she brought his/her friends, they separate) ventures into the woods to find Reuben. Just as Reuben is found, Jesse and Reuben are surrounded by hostile mobs, and Jesse may tell Reuben to run or stay behind him/her as he/she tries to fight off the mobs. He/she is quickly overpowered by a spider, when suddenly their friend Petra (Ashley Johnson) appears and kills it. She takes Jesse (and Reuben) to a nearby cave for safety, where she tells him/her that she wants him/her to come along as she trades a Wither Skeleton Skull for a diamond.

At EnderCon, Jesse and friends (potentially without Reuben) meet up and either celebrate their victory at the building competition, or bemoan their loss. They split up again, and Petra brings Jesse (and Reuben) to the meeting place. Unfortunately, Ivor (Paul Reubens), the man Petra sells the skull to, rips her off and flees. Jesse and Petra, joined by Axel, Olivia, the kind Ocelot leader, Lukas (Scott Porter), and eventually Reuben, follow Ivor into an underground laboratory. There, they discover him making a Wither (with a Command Block in the middle of the statue used to summon it), but are unable to stop him. The creature attacks EnderCon and targets Gabriel (Dave Fennoy), a member of the Order of the Stone (who is a guest speaker at EnderCon), who seems to know Ivor. Ivor soon loses control of the Wither as it uses its Command Block to suck up blocks to make itself bigger. Earlier, in Ivor's laboratory, either Axel or Jesse steals what appears to be Ivor's most valuable potion, and puts another in its place. Ivor planned to use this to destroy the Wither, and when the replacement potion fails to stop it, it breaks out of the convention and starts sucking up blocks (and people) from all around, having transformed into a giant, more horrific creature known as the Wither Storm. It continues to follow Gabriel (and Jesse and his/her friends, who Gabriel instructed to follow him) as it destroys the town, forcing the group to escape into Gabriel's fortress. Gabriel sends Jesse's group through the Nether to find Order members Magnus and Ellegaard, and gives them an amulet to guide them. They are forced to leave Petra and Gabriel behind, but right before going through the Nether portal, Jesse must either save Petra or Gabriel from the Wither Storm's tractor beams.

In the Nether, Jesse and friends confront Ivor (who followed them into the Nether), but as they argue, a ghast appears. Ivor points out a minecart track system left by the Order, and he drinks a potion of invisibility. The friends use the tracks to find their way to the Overworld, where the group decides to bunk for the night. Axel is bitter towards Lukas for not helping when Petra was in danger (he also probably has a grudge against him for the years of losing the EnderCon building competition), and Jesse must settle their conflict by siding with Axel or Lukas, or simply forcing them to calm down. The next morning, the group arrives at the Order fortress, where they discover that Ivor had actually been a member of the Order, but had been inexplicably kicked out, explaining several previously queer actions on Ivor's part. They also find a contraption that, when connected to the amulet, shows on a map the current locations of the members of the Order. Lukas decides to stay and fortify the fortress, and asks that one of the four stay with him. Jesse must choose to seek out one of two members of the Order: Magnus, the greatest expert on TNT alive, with Axel (leaving Olivia to help Lukas), or Ellegaard, the greatest redstone mechanic alive, with Olivia (leaving Axel to help Lukas). As Jesse and Axel/Olivia prepare to leave, they can see the Wither Storm in the distance, approaching them.

===== "Assembly Required" (Episode 2) =====
Jesse and Axel or Olivia use the Nether minecart system to get to Boom Town or Redstonia and bring Magnus (Corey Feldman) or Ellegaard (Grey Griffin) back to help them. After successfully finding him/her and bringing him/her back, they return to the temple and discover that Petra or Gabriel, the one Jesse saved before entering the Nether in Episode One, has arrived at the temple. He/she also finds that Olivia or Axel (whoever was left to help Lukas) has, on their own, left and retrieved Ellegaard or Magnus (the one that Jesse didn't retrieve himself). It is very quickly revealed that Ellegaard and Magnus are very aggressive towards each other, and it will be difficult to get them to work together. Returning to the Order-tracking contraption, they discover that it now shows the location of the last, long thought lost member, Soren, not too far away; as well as Ivor, who is heading towards him. Ellegaard reveals that an incredibly powerful explosive, dubbed the Formidi-Bomb, is in Soren's possession, and proposes this as a solution to the problem of the Wither Storm. The group leaves to find Soren and his secret lab. Upon arriving, Jesse, Lukas and Reuben briefly get separated from the rest of the group, and when they reunite, they find Magnus and Ellegaard departing alone in two different directions to find the "F-Bomb." Jesse must follow one, and when Petra/Gabriel states that she/he has something private to discuss with him/her, Lukas, Olivia and Axel agree to follow the other Order member, and they separate. As they walk, Petra/Gabriel reveals to Jesse that, despite his/her saving her/him, they weren't saved quick enough, and Petra/Gabriel have been infected by Wither Sickness, which is getting worse by the minute. As Jesse ventures deep into Soren's lab, he/she comes across Ivor. Petra/Gabriel fights Ivor, and they state their plan to destroy the Wither Storm with the Formidi-Bomb. Just as Jesse's friends are reunited, Ivor traps them in a library, while stating that the Order cannot defeat the Wither Storm, much less make it out alive.

===== "The Last Place You Look" (Episode 3) =====
The group, with much work, escapes from the library, but end up in an automatic hostile mob farm, apparently built by Soren (John Hodgeman), while using the amulet to follow his trail. This, too, they narrowly escape. They suddenly lose Soren's path, but find that he must have escaped through an End Portal. The friends, when they appear in the End, can see Soren in the distance, and follow him into his home, where they find him studying and experimenting with Endermen. Jesse convinces Soren to donate his Formidi-Bomb to help destroy the Wither Storm, but, through a series of Enderman-related mishaps, they are forced to evacuate Soren's house with it completely underwater. They return to the overworld, where Soren gives Jesse the ingredients to make a Formidi-Bomb (he hasn't actually created one). They finally reunite with Magnus and Ellegaard. Soren asks for a volunteer to set off the Formidi-Bomb, reminding them that the bomb will explode within seconds of being made. Jesse volunteers. Magnus and Ellegaard offer their armor to protect him/her while building the bomb, and Jesse must choose whose armor he/she will take. 

Jesse allows himself/herself to be drawn by a tractor beam close to the Storm. While Jesse's friends build distractions to keep the Wither Storm moving as Jesse is crafting the Formidi-Bomb, one of the Storm's attacks seriously injures Magnus or Ellegaard (the one whose armor Jesse accepted). Jesse launches the bomb towards the monster, and Jesse's friends use a fishing rod to pull him/her far enough away from the explosion as to not be harmed. The explosion tears the Storm apart very effectively. Unfortunately, Magnus or Ellegaard passes away shortly afterward from the injuries he/she sustained. The friends then find that everyone that the Wither Storm sucked into itself are still alive, and have been freed with the Storm's destruction; while Jesse helps them out and examines the wreckage, he/she comes across the fully intact Command Block in the middle of the Storm. It suddenly re-activates and starts resurrecting the Wither Storm - now in three parts. Jesse is almost pulled into the newly-formed Wither Storms, but suddenly Gabriel or Petra, the one Jesse did not save and was just freed from the Storm, pulls him/her to safety. Jesse begins to run, but soon finds out that Gabriel/Petra is, very inconveniently, completely amnesiac.

===== "A Block and a Hard Place" (Episode 4) =====
The group is forced to flee the three new Storms. They regroup in a nearby cave and discuss the events of the day, with Petra/Gabriel, the one Jesse saved in Episode One, becoming incredibly ill; and Gabriel/Petra, the one the Wither Storm sucked in, completely void of memory. Soren is bitter because of Magnus/Ellegaard's death, and the reformation of the Wither Storms, and leaves the group to think things over. The amnesiac member of the group unwittingly reveals that the other Ocelots are nearby, and Jesse must choose to allow Lukas to go and find them, or force him to stay with them. Suddenly, Ivor appears, and, after an argument with Soren, reveals that the Storms are following Jesse's amulet, and proposes a solution: At his laboratory, in the Far Lands, he owns an enchanted book containing the power of the Command Block itself. He explains that, if used to enchant a tool, said tool could destroy the Command Block. Axel takes Jesse's amulet so that the Storms don't follow him/her, and Jesse, Olivia, Soren, Ivor and Gabriel/Petra (the amnesiac), and potentially Lukas, leave for the Far Lands. Along the way, Ivor is separated from the rest. The group has great difficulty figuring out various puzzles in the way of the room containing the book, but once there, Jesse finds the End Crystals supposedly destroyed in the Order's battle with the Enderdragon. Soren is forced to admit the truth: The Order used the Command Block to complete most of their adventures, including their killing the Enderdragon - they simply glitched it out of existence. They then took full credit for it, and swore never to speak the truth. Ivor then reappears and reveals that he left in disgust, and planned to use the Wither Storm to show the world the truth about the Order.

Jesse proceeds to construct the enchanted tool (it may be a sword, pickaxe, axe, shovel or hoe) and may also accept new armor from Ivor. Once they return, all four members of the Order (and, if she has Wither Sickness, Petra) are separated from the group, and Jesse and his/her friends are forced to take care of the Storm. (If Lukas was allowed to leave and find the Ocelots, they help as well.) With the unwitting help of the multitudes of Endermen (that escaped the End when Soren's lab went underwater), Jesse enters the Wither Storm and destroys the Command Block. Reuben surprises Jesse by joining him/her, and greatly helps, but shortly before the final blow to the Command Block is dealt, Reuben falls a very long distance out of the Wither Storm onto the ground. The Storm, once again, falls apart. Jesse falls into water, and finds Reuben badly injured nearby, and sits next to him as he, sadly, dies. Gabriel and Petra are both promptly void of their sickness and amnesia, whichever had which.

One week later, a celebration is held for the friends' victory (of which Soren is absent, for some unknown reason), and the friends are dubbed the "New Order of the Stone." Jesse may also have Gabriel admit the truth about the "old" Order. As the episode closes, the narrator hints that the friends' adventures are just beginning, for there are "many more worlds than just ours."

====="Order Up!" (Episode 5) =====
Three months after the events of Episode Four, the New Order (Jesse, Axel, Olivia and Petra) go, on a tip from Ivor, to an ancient jungle temple where they discover a mysterious enchanted Flint and Steel. Outside the temple, they're suddenly accosted by the Ocelots, with Aiden in charge - he has taken over Lukas' role as the leader. They reveal that they purposefully ditched Lukas, and have renamed themselves the "Blaze Rods." Aiden is severely bitter towards the fame the New Order has attained, and demands that Jesse surrender the Flint and Steel to him; but after coming close to a violent fight, Jesse and friends manage to scare the Blaze Rods away. Back in town, Axel and Olivia are separated from Jesse and Petra, who show the Flint and Steel to Ivor. He then claims that, according to his research, the temple and the Flint and Steel are both products of a legendary, ancient group of master builders - the "Old Builders" - and that the enchanted Flint and Steel is the key to finding an all-powerful object known as the "Eversource," which gave the Old Builders an unlimited supply of building material. They go back to the temple to search for futher clues, bringing Lukas as well. In a hidden second floor, they find a golden portal frame, which Jesse activates with the Flint and Steel. The Blaze Rods then appear and ambush them, taking the Flint and Steel and running through the portal. The four give chase.

Suddenly, the group find themselves alone on a floating dirt island in the sky. The four use the dirt to build a bridge over to what appears to be a giant kingdom atop the clouds. They soon find out that the kingdom, by the name of Sky City, has a ban on all building and breaking of blocks unless approved by the leader, The Founder. Because of this, they have great difficulty getting info from the inhabitants they meet. Following the Blaze Rods' trail, they talk to an innkeeper named Milo. He says that the Blaze Rods were after the Eversource, which is in the palace, and they left for it some time ago. Unfortunately, they then find that Aiden has fooled The Founder into thinking that the Order have evil intentions (also revealing the bridge built into the city), and Ivor and Lukas are captured (although Ivor is willing to be imprisoned, as he reasons that this will get him close to the Eversource). Petra escapes with Milo. Jesse may choose to turn himself/herself over as well, or escape with Milo and Petra. Milo turns out to be the leader of an underground rebellion called "Build Club." He believes that building should not be regulated like it is, and he and his friends do it freely while hidden. Either way, Ivor and Lukas (and possibly Jesse) soon escape from the prison, and Petra and Milo (and possibly Jesse) infiltrate the Founder's palace, and they regroup, with plans to find the Eversource. Milo wants to steal it for Build Club (Ivor wants to take it home). They soon find the Eversource in a basement, but they are surprised to find it to be nothing more than a chicken that lays Spawn Eggs. Jesse may conspire to take it home, give it to Milo, or leave it alone.

Suddenly, the five are ambushed by Aiden and The Founder. The Founder confronts them, adamant in believing they planned to steal it. Then, Aiden reveals his true colors, and knocks The Founder, Jesse, and sometimes Lukas over the edge. To their surprise, they find themselves in an all-new, untouched overworld below Sky City - The Founder was convinced that nothing but an abyss lay below them. She and Jesse build a dirt tower back to Sky City (Lukas, if he was sent over, is worn out from his fight with Aiden), only to find it slowly being destroyed by monsters that the Blaze Rods are furiously summoning from spawn eggs. Jesse gets into the palace and confronts Aiden, and after retrieving the Flint and Steel and cornering Aiden at the edge, he/she may elect to send Aiden over the edge, bring him to safety with them, or simply leave him there. The group decides that Sky City is hopeless, and everyone uses a waterfall to float to the ground below. When the Sky City inhabitants realize that they must start a new civilization, Jesse must choose whether to leave The Founder in charge (who will simply reinstate the government Sky City was run by), Milo in charge (who supports anarchy and total freedom), or have them share power (with a sort of republic being formed). Jesse then reveals that he/she and the Founder discovered the portal frame for going home while they were building the dirt tower, and he/she lights it. They all go through - only to find themselves in an extremely long, dimly lit corridor filled with portals.

===== "A Portal to Mystery" (Episode 6) =====
Upon entering one of the portals, Jesse, Lukas, Petra and Ivor find themselves in a swamp in a world similar to their own, with two major incongruities - there are two moons, and they are greeted by a very massive horde of zombies. They find a mysterious invitation on the ground close to where they appeared, which invites them to a nearby mansion "for an evening of fun and festivity with your fellow adventurers." Inside the mansion, they find seven other people who were invited as well; five of which are well-known Minecraft YouTubers CaptainSparklez, Stampylonghead, DanTDM, LDShadowLady and StacyPlays. The other two appear to be made-up YouTubers who go by TorqueDawg and Cassie Rose. As it turns out, the seven are just as oblivious to the mansion as the Order. When the four get inside, they meet CaptainSparklez and TorqueDawg, but after a few minutes' discussion, suddenly the lights go out in the room and TorqueDawg is found dead, shot to death with poison-tipped arrows from a dispenser above.

With this shocking news, the remaining six other guests begin to act very suspicious and secretive, and taking certain circumstances into account, all ten agree that they are in grave danger - but they cannot escape, due to the horde of zombies outside. Jesse questions the YouTubers, none of which have any insight. Then, CaptainSparklez has a hunch, but as he begins to explain that the murderer is trying to obtain an enchanted Flint and Steel, such as the one Jesse has, he is suddenly caught in a trap and dies. Accompanying the trap is a presentation prepared by the murderer, who introduces himself/herself as "The White Pumpkin," and confirms CaptainSparklez' hunch. Jesse searches for clues that may reveal The White Pumpkin's identity and, due to his/her finding a button on the table that the group sat at, concludes that one of the YouTubers is the murderer. 

A series of investigations and clue-hunting lead Jesse to a secret passageway integrated throughout the mansion, from which the White Pumpkin watches the group, activating traps. A near-apprehension of the murderer, the death of either LDShadowLady or DanTDM, and a few other clues lead most of the YouTubers to believe Lukas is the White Pumpkin, but Jesse, Petra and Stampy (who had an enchanted Flint and Steel as well) manage to find the White Pumpkin's base of operations, which has clues that reveal the White Pumpkin to be Cassie Rose. Upon breaking the news to the other YouTubers, and forcing Cassie to admit the truth, she accidentally sets off one of her own traps and is killed. At dawn, Jesse, Petra, Lukas, Ivor, Stampylonghead, StacyPlays and DanTDM/LDShadowLady exit the mansion and go their separate ways. The Order approaches what appears to be an unlit portal frame, but upon lighting it they suddenly fall into a deep, dark chamber below.

As it turns out, Cassie faked her death, and engineered this final trap to get Jesse to surrender his/her enchanted Flint and Steel - she had been trapped in this world for years, and intends to finally escape with the Flint and Steel she hoped to obtain from the invitees. Jesse and friends manage to outsmart her, and leave her stuck on a floating platform above a pit of endermites. The group then lights the real portal, which was in an underground room nearby, and go inside.

===== "Access Denied" (Episode 7) =====
Jesse and friends are constantly running between portals in the hall, and undertaking minor adventures in the worlds behind those portals, trying to find their way home. Eventually, this exhausts and angers Petra, who finds a redstone-themed portal frame and concludes that "redstone means smart people. Hopefully smart enough to help us find the way home." The others cannot convince her otherwise, and all four go inside.

The four find themselves in a desert mesa world. They are confused as they meet very resilient, tough and fast people and mobs that appear to be mind-controlled via redstone. The four are captured by some of these people, and are taken to meet the thing responsible: PAMA - Prototype Autonomous Management Agent - an artificially intelligent computer that controls everything in this world. It claims that it is making everything efficient and "useful," with no wasted energy. It begins to question Jesse and friends, knowing that they are foreigners. It desires to escape this world and make more things "useful," and when it doesn't get the info it seeks, it makes Petra and Lukas "useful," which allows PAMA to know everything a person knows. Jesse and Ivor manage to escape. They meet a "useless" woman named Harper, who turns out to be PAMA's creator (she intended it to simply make use of mobs to help out with farming and mining, until the day PAMA decided to do the same to the people themselves). She brings them to the entrance to her secret lab, which has something that will help them defeat PAMA and save everyone. As it turns out, Harper is also an Old Builder, who helped build the Portal Hall and can help Jesse and friends get home. She reveals that, however, she destroyed the exit portal from this world, so that PAMA could not get out, but she knows how to build one. Lukas, Petra and some monsters then find them and attack. Jesse may save Petra or Lukas by pushing them into water, but the other captures Harper and brings her to PAMA. As Petra/Lukas leaves with Harper, she gives Jesse vague clues to a puzzle in her lab, telling him/her to "use the headset."

Jesse, Ivor and Lukas/Petra enter Harper's lab and, after solving Harper's puzzle, find the VR headset mentioned, and wears it. It allows Jesse to take control over and migrate into PAMA-controlled mobs, all while in the laboratory. Controlling a zombie, Jesse frees Harper before she is made "useful,"and Harper shows him/her the entrance to PAMA's processors and power source, the Redstone Heart. She is then re-captured, and apparently made "useful," as PAMA destroys the headset. PAMA begins to create an exit portal. Jesse, Ivor and Lukas/Petra all help Jesse to get inside PAMA, with plans to destroy the processors with water. He/she accomplishes this, and after a fight with Harper and Petra/Lukas, Jesse rips out PAMA's power source, the Redstone Heart.

With Harper and Petra/Lukas freed and PAMA destroyed, the five head into the center of the town that PAMA took over, and meet the now free townspeople, who are very angry with Harper. Jesse may support Harper and encourage them to forgive her, or not. They then finish the exit portal, and Harper shows Jesse a very long stairway hidden behind a portal that will lead them to the other Old Builders, who possess an item called a "Portal Atlas," which will show Jesse and friends the way home.

===== "A Journey's End?" (Episode 8) =====
Harper leads the four into the Old Builders' world just outside the hallway, via the stairs uncovered in Episode Seven. When they arrive at a door, Harper suddenly warns them "don't die!" and pushes them in. They fall into a very violent game of Spleef. They struggle to keep from being eliminated, and when Ivor and Petra are in trouble, Jesse must choose which to save. Lukas tries to save the other, but he and Ivor/Petra fall out of the match and are "eliminated" (killed by fast-moving pistons). Jesse goes on a rage and begins to attack competitors, but this is against the rules and the match is stopped. Judging and overseeing the match are three Old Builders, Hadrian, Mevia and Otto, who are upset with Jesse and question him/her. They explain that Lukas and Ivor/Petra are not dead, but have respawned nearby and are forced to work in Nether Quartz mines until they are called to play in the Games (Spleef, among others) again. Jesse and Hadrian make a deal: If Jesse can win the Games, the Old Builders will let him/her keep the Portal Atlas and take all his/her friends home. (If they lose, Harper must work in the mines too.) Harper appears and takes Jesse and Petra/Ivor to the village where competitors stay, and explains that people are forced to play in the Games until they win; this is nearly impossible, as the Games are rigged - the Games are designed not for sport, but to entertain the Old Builders, and no one wins unless they so desire. Harper leaves to talk to Otto, as he is known for his loyalty to fairness and rules, and may help Jesse.

Jesse gets Lukas and Ivor/Petra out of the mines, for, technically, eliminated competitors are not to go to the mines until their entire team is eliminated. Otto appears and expresses support for Jesse, saying he will make sure that if Jesse wins, he/she will get the Atlas - Hadrian and Mevia usually change deals and rules around on people. Jesse completes the second competition - a race - but Petra/Ivor is killed. After the race, Jesse is called into Hadrian's office to further discuss the terms of their deal. Hadrian has used the Atlas to read about Jesse's background as a multi-world hero, and, unfortunately, locked up Olivia, Axel, and an Usher from EnderCon (Episode One) (whose name is Reuben, which confused Hadrian) in his office as an incentive for Jesse to accept another deal: Jesse will throw the match and lose the Games, and Lukas, Ivor, Petra, Axel, Olivia, Harper and "Reuben" can go home while Jesse stays in the mines. Jesse may accept or deny this deal.

Returning to the village, Jesse convinces the other teams to cooperate and rebel against Hadrian and Mevia by all winning at the same time. This works, and Otto begins to grant Jesse the Atlas, satisfying the original deal, but Hadrian and Mevia throw a tantrum and trap him and most players in obsidian. Jesse and the Old Builders fight, and Jesse is killed, but when he respawns, Harper (who freed Axel and Olivia), Axel, Olivia, Ivor, Petra, Lukas and Emily (one of Jesse's competitors and newfound friends) appear with weapons, tools, and the armor of "Tim" (a made-up character by Hadrian in order to inspire the others to continue playing). Jesse returns to the arena and "eliminates" Hadrian and Mevia. Otto gives Jesse the Atlas, and everyone returns to the Portal Hall. Harper and Emily, by respective suggestions from Jesse, may each return to their own homes, seek a home elsewhere (Harper) or keep playing the Games (Emily), or join the Order in their homeworld. Otto expresses his plans to make the Games fun again. Jesse, Axel, Olivia, Ivor, Petra, Lukas, and possibly Harper and/or Emily, go through the Portal that drops them off in Jesse and friends' homeworld. Jesse shows their new treasures to Axel and Olivia. After a moment's discussion, they suddenly find that the Atlas and the Enchanted Flint and Steel are missing, and that Ivor has left. Jesse and friends may follow him, or stay and wait for him to return.

In a post-credits scene, Hadrian and Mevia have found themselves in either a world of chicken-sized zombies, or zombie-sized chickens; this is determined by a choice that Jesse made as an answer to a joke by Olivia at the very beginning of Episode One.

==== Season 2 (2017) ====
===== "Hero in Residence" (Episode 1) =====

One year after the events of Season 1, Lukas narrates a novel about Jesse and their friends' adventures and their popularity. As he finishes, Jesse, Axel, and Olivia provide feedback for the novel. Along with Radar, Jesse's new assistant, they leave the Order's palace to prepare for Founding Day celebrations throughout the world. Radar stays with Jesse to help with various tasks in Beacontown, while the others leave for their respective cities. Afterwards, Jesse heads to the mines to meet Petra, who has been sent to find a mysterious creature by Stella, the leader of a rivaling city, "Champion City", who has Petra's golden sword.

In the mines, Jesse and Petra fight off zombies, then race through the mine shaft to find the creature, which turns out to be a "treasure-sniffing" llama named Lluna. They capture the llama, and also find a strange gauntlet on top of a pyramid that whispers Jesse's name. As Jesse reaches for it, the gauntlet clamps to his/her hand and the pyramid collapses, revealing a bottomless pit. They close off the pit and escape. Back on the surface, Jesse leaves a warning sign, and they head to Champion City to take Lluna to Stella. The two meet Stella and give Lluna back to her as she informs Petra that the "adventure" was a scam and doesn't return the sword. The two decide to steal the sword back. Once they reach Stella's treasure room, they find that the sword is missing. Stella shows up, and accepts defeat after inadvertently revealing she's a fan of Jesse, and gives the sword back.

As they head back to Beacontown, the bottomless pit blows open and spews out charged creepers, and they fight them off before sealing it again. They head straight to Beacontown to meet Jack, a former treasure hunter. Jack talks to Jesse about the gauntlet, and introduces them to Nurm, Jack's map-maker. The four get some armor from the Order's palace, and head to an ocean temple. As they travel, Jack informs them how the ocean monument is run by "the Admin", a being of infinite power. They suit up in water helmets, and swim to the ocean monument. Jesse completes a door frame, and frees Vos, Jack's old friend. Jack is surprised to see Vos alive (as he had supposedly been killed on their previous visit). The five reach the main part of the temple. They find the two structure blocks, and pick one. After fighting off stone guards, including the Admin, a giant colossus statue, the five then escape back to Beacontown. The group close the pit with the structure block, and celebrate Founding Day. As the celebration starts, the Admin goes after Jesse, vowing to demolish them.

While Lukas is at his house finishing his novel, he sees the Admin approaching Beacontown. He suits up and rides off to help Jesse.

===== "Giant Consequences" (Episode 2) =====
The Admin meets Jesse at Beacontown, and the two fight, damaging Beacontown in the process. The Admin uses a giant clock to turn day into night so that monsters would invade the city. The Admin also swallows the structure block. Just as the Admin is about to swallow Jesse, Lukas distracts him with an arrow to the face, and saves Jesse. Jesse notices the symbol on the Admin's head was the same symbol shown on the back of the Prismarine Golems at the ocean temple, and Jesse realizes that destroying the symbol is the only way of destroying the Admin. Jesse takes Lukas' horse, climbs up the Admin, and kills him, dropping the clock, which Jesse uses to raise the sun.

In the aftermath, Jesse and others begin rebuilding Beacontown. Jesse can give either Lukas or Radar the title of "Clockmaster", which basically involves watching a giant clock all day. Jesse then meets up with Jack and Vos, who unintentionally spill that they are about to go on a new adventure with Nurm and Petra. Suddenly, Jesse and Petra see snowflakes falling in Beacontown and one of them ends up melting inside the gauntlet, revealing the Admin to be a snowman. The Admin gives Jesse a challenge: Beacontown will remain dark and surrounded by hostile mobs until Jesse reclaims the giant clock, which the Admin says is "at the tippy top of my awesome, fantastic, super-deadly icy palace of despair". Jesse and the others fight off numerous monsters and zombies, and the group (consisting of Jesse, Petra, Lukas, Radar, Jack, Nurm and Vos) head toward the ice palace. On the way to the ice palace, the group encounter Lluna and Stella, who eventually tags along with them in order to "keep an eye on them".

At the ice palace, the snowman drops the group into the pit. The group eventually end up in a roller-coaster-like maze, and meet the Admin once more, giving the group several challenges. Nonetheless, the Admin insists that only one person is supposed to win, and throws Radar/Jack into another challenge, with Vos randomly disappearing. The group then mine their way out with a diamond pickaxe and face numerous Snow "Endercreepers". Jesse can then choose whether Petra or Jack should get the clock. Petra/Jack makes it up to the clock and destroys it, turning the world back to normal time. Lukas leaves immediately, but Jack insists on finding Vos, and the rest help Jack to try and find him. Soon, it is revealed that Vos was actually the Admin the entire time as the real Vos died years ago, and he is convinced on partnering up by Stella. The Admin then transports the gauntlet to whoever destroyed the clock and proceeds to teleport Jesse and friends, minus Lukas, to a jailhouse.

===== "Jailhouse Block" (Episode 3) =====
Jesse arrives at the "Sunshine Institute", an underground prison where the Admin likes to keep people that he detests and their loved ones as prisoners, as well as people meant to act as guards. Jesse immediately tries to escape with help from Jack/Petra (who was not chosen as a champion) where they discover that the prison is in the middle of a labyrinth filled with dangerous monsters. They are immediately apprehended and sent back to the prison. Jesse meets the Warden, a former "Guest" (prisoner) that was promoted, who proceeds to torture Radar in order to coerce Jesse into becoming an "Associate" (Guard), which Jesse can either accept this new role or refuse it. If he/she accepts the role he/she will be an Associate, but if not the Warden will break Radar's glasses and give him a black-eye. They also discover that Stella is also an Associate of the deeper floor. After hearing of an attempted escape from Prisoner X, they discover that they need her help in order for them to get out of there.

As an associate/guest, Jesse will find another guest's secret stash, a Mooshroom. Once the Warden finds out, he will ask Jesse to shear the mushrooms from the Mooshroom to change it back to a regular cow promising a promotion to the lower depths if he/she obeys. If he/she shears the cow, Jesse will be promoted to an associate in the lower depths (Jack/Petra, Nurm & Radar will cause trouble to be demoted to follow the player), but upon refusal, Jesse and his/her friends will be demoted to the lower depths as guests. Once in the lower levels, Jesse asks assistance from Stella to make a lever to open Prisoner X's cell. The player can either promise to help her escape as well or not. After successfully opening the gate to Prisoner X's cell, the Admin shows up, fires the Warden, and forces Jesse and Jack/Petra (whoever became the champion in the previous episode) to fight to the death, but they instead cooperate to try and attack the Admin. Annoyed by this he abandons the Sunshine Institute. Before leaving, however, the Admin comes up with a new plan to impersonate Jesse and take over his/her life in Beacontown and takes Stella with him.

The group proceed to Prisoner X's isolated cell, which is rigged to explode if no one is standing on at least one stone pressure plate, which means that either Nurm or Lluna need to be left behind so that they can escape. After their escape, they learn that Prisoner X, whose real name is Xara, is a former Admin. They were told that Xara and another Admin named Fred fought "Romeo" (the Admin's real name) for control of the world, but Fred was killed and Xara's powers were taken away.

After fighting through the monster-filled labyrinth, Jesse can either choose to help Xara when she ditches them, or to leave her to fend for herself. Whatever the player choose they will meet up with her at the base of a Diamond Tower. Xara explains that there is a passageway beneath the tower and they need to dig into the bedrock to escape, she also explains that the secret to rid Romeo of his abilities also lies there as well. They enter the passageway, with a Giant Enderman in the approaching.

Romeo, in Jesse's form, proceeds to give the Order of the Stone's Amulet to an armored assailant to try and hunt down Jesse and his friends.

===== "Below the Bedrock" (Episode 4) =====
Jesse and company reach the "Underneath" the first world created by Romeo, Fred and Xara. Xara explains that this place was sealed by Romeo a long time ago after killing Fred and imprisoning Xara. After arriving at Xara's ruined city "The Oasis", Xara points them to a destroyed portal that could bring them to the surface. Jesse asks Xara to rebuild the portal while Xara tells them that they need an object from Romeo or the Surface to help power the portal. She tells them to head to "Fred's Keep" to find the weapon that can stop Romeo, and to look out for anything that can be used to power the portal.

While travelling via minecart to Fred's Keep, the group are assaulted by the Giant Enderman, which leaves Jesse and Jack precariously on the edge of a giant cliff. They are met by scavengers who demand their weapons for safe passage. If Jesse refuses, Jack will seemingly fall to his death.

Jesse and company find themselves in Fred's Keep where they discover a group of people who venerate Fred as their former protector and the creator of their safe village. Jesse asks to enter his house to look for the weapon, but only the winner of the annual Fred Trivia Contest may enter. After winning the trivia contest or sneaking inside, they discover that the weapon is found in the original house, a cabin, Fred, Xara and Romeo used to live in. The leader of Fred's Keep, Binta, gives them a device to point them in the right direction in exchange of helping the get “Friends of Fred” (villagers) out of the Underneath. If Jack and Nurm are still in the party, they will stay behind to convince more people to join; if not, Nurm will stay to wait for Jack.

While travelling to the Admins' First Home, they are assaulted by an Armored Assailant, or ninja, who is revealed to be Ivor. Ivor informs the group of the admin's misdeeds and proceeds to fake a report to buy them time to look for the weapon. Before Ivor leaves, Jesse asks for the Amulet of the Order of the Stone to use as a part of the portal.

The trio discover that the Admins' First Home is in Romeoburg and they needed to complete his challenges to proceed. Inside the cabin they find Fred's Journal, containing a keyword (#potato451) and a set of instructions on how to defeat the Admin. Realizing how similar their and the Admins’ former friendship were, Petra becomes emotional and worries that their own friendship would end just like the Admins’. She also confesses to Jesse that her place is not in Beacontown, but she wouldn't leave if it means she would lose Jesse. Jesse could either promise Petra to leave with her or wait for her as long as it takes.

Upon returning to the Oasis, Jesse and company activates the firework to signal Fred's people that they are ready to leave. He also gives Xara the diary, and she swears vengeance on Romeo. The fireworks attract the Giant Enderman as well as several mobs of monsters. Depending on previous actions Xara either stays to help fight off the mob or abandons the group. The people of Fred's Keep will arrive to help; Jack will also reemerge here if he fell down in the first act. Radar discovers that the Giant Enderman is angry at him after he attacked it earlier and asks Jesse if he can use himself as bait to save Fred's people. Jesse is then given the choice to either leave Radar behind or to abandon Fred's people.

Upon entering the portal they find themselves on the outskirts of the Temple of the Order of the Stone, and are horrified of the new Beacontown.

In the epilogue Lukas can be seen just getting back from the Ice Palace greeting Jesse (Romeo) asking where everyone is. The Admin's eyes glow red as the scene cuts to black.

===== "Above and Beyond" (Episode 5) =====

Jesse, Petra, Jack, Radar/Binta and Nurm/Lluna use the mines to enter Beacontown in secret. In the town they discover Romeo (In Jesse's Form), Stella, Axel, and Olivia preparing for JesseCon, a narcissistic Festival for himself. If Xara left to abandon Jesse she will attack Romeo and get killed by him. If Xara stayed behind Romeo will blow up Champion City in front of Stella as an example to them.

They deduce that the Giant Tower in the middle of town is the "Primary Terminal", the place or object in the diary's instruction, but they will need a plan to get there. Jesse reveals himself/herself to Axel and Olivia, who follow Jesse to Jack's shop where they discover its contents were looted. They discover the Elytra Wings in the looted shop, only to see Ivor appear in the shop afterwards (having rescued Nurm/Lluna) and they start planning on how they are going to get to the "Terminal".

After successfully enacting their plan to fly to the tower they discover that Lukas has freed Romeo's prisoners and have banded together to create the "New Ocelots". After proving to them that he's/she's the real Jesse they head to the roof only to discover that Romeo is in his office. Jesse can then choose to attack him or talk to him. Regardless of the choice Romeo determines to give up on the world. He decides it deserves the same fate as the old world. As he is encasing the entire world with bedrock, they make their way to the "Terminal Space" portal on top of the roof.

In the Terminal Space they discover a sealed door. The door is sealed with a puzzle whose answer lies within the keyword #potato451. After solving the puzzle, they are gifted with a hologram of Fred that gives them a Golden Gauntlet that can take away Romeo's powers, but not before Romeo arrives immediately afterwards. After Jesse punches him with the Gauntlet, Romeo immediately discovers that some of his abilities are gone.

Jesse and Romeo fight each other with Romeo changing locations and forms with each defeat. After removing Romeo's powers completely, "Terminal Space" begins to crumble, and Jesse can choose to leave Romeo behind or bring him with the group. While the "Terminal Space" is crumbling around them, The Giant Prismarine Colossus glitches out and then starts attacking anything indiscriminately. If Xara and Radar was left behind, the latter will arrive, still being chased by the Giant Enderman, which will then kill the Colossus allowing everyone to escape. Otherwise Romeo will sacrifice himself so that everyone else can leave. After the destruction of "Terminal Space" the bedrock in the sky disappears. If Romeo and Xara both survive Romeo will do his best to try and make up for what he did, starting with Xara and the surviving citizens of the Underneath.

While Beacontown is being rebuilt, Ivor says that he will try to reconnect with the old Order of the Stone. Lukas, Radar, Jack, and Nurm decided to stay in Beacontown to help them rebuild. Depending on Jesse's relationship with Stella and Lluna, Stella could ask him/her to take care of Lluna in Beacontown while Champion City is being rebuilt, Lluna could choose to stay with Jesse against Stella's wishes, or both will leave. Axel and Olivia decide to return to their communities, but Petra decides to venture out.

The player can then choose to leave with Petra or stay in Beacontown. If the player decides to leave with Petra, Jesse can assign Radar to be his/her temporary replacement or allow the citizens to decide a new leader. If Lluna stayed with Jesse, she will also accompany Jesse & Petra on their new adventure. However, if the player stays in Beacontown, Radar will tell Jesse that he checked the mail chest and found some mail. The first letter is about Aiden (absent since season 1) wanting to redeem himself. The second letter is sent by someone under the initials “WP” (White Pumpkin; absent since season 1) saying "Look out".

==Episodes==
===Season 1 (2015–16)===
The main "Minecraft: Story Mode" game was separated into five episodes for Season 1, released in one month intervals. Three additional episodes were later released.

===Season 2 (2017)===
In July 2017, the first trailer was released for season 2 revealing a release date of July 11.
==Development and releases==
The idea for "Minecraft: Story Mode" came around the end of 2012 when Telltale Games was engaged in work for "Tales from the Borderlands", an episodic series based on the "Borderlands" series. The idea of developing stories around other established video game franchises led the team to brainstorm the idea for a "Minecraft"-related game, given that the game was essentially a "blank canvas" for storytelling, according to Job Stauffer, and would create an interesting challenge. Other primary characters in the game are loosely designed around archetypes of common player-characters for "Minecraft", such that those that engage in building, fighting, or griefing other players. The game will not attempt to provide any background for some concepts in "Minecraft", such as the creepers, as to avoid the various interpretations that fans have done for these elements, though they are elements of the game's story. Its first trailer was released during the Minecon 2015 convention in early July. Telltale also released the game for the Wii U, only a month after the original "Minecraft" first came to a Nintendo platform. It was also the first time a Telltale title had been released on a Nintendo platform since "Back to the Future: The Game".

The series released for most systems on October 13, 2015, with the PlayStation Vita and Wii U versions to follow at a later date. A season pass of the game was available for purchase on October 27, 2015, which allows the player to access the other four episodes once they are released. Amid troubles related to the bankruptcy of Telltale Games in October and November 2018, sufficient staff remained with Telltale to complete work on this version, which was released onto Netflix on November 27 and December 5, 2018.

=== Sequel ===
The first episode of "Minecraft: Story Mode – Season Two" was released on July 11, 2017 for Windows, macOS, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, iOS and Android. It continued the story from the first season, with the player's choices affecting elements within "Season 2". Patton Oswalt, Catherine Taber, Ashley Johnson, and Scott Porter were confirmed to continue voicework for the new season. The game supports the new Crowd Play feature that Telltale introduced in "Batman: The Telltale Series", allowing up to 2,000 audience members to vote on decisions for the player using Twitch or other streaming services.

On August 3, 2017, Telltale announced that second episode, "Giant Consequences", would be released on August 15. The rest of the episodes were released on September 19, November 7, and December 19, 2017.

==Reception==
"Minecraft: Story Mode" received "mixed or average reviews" from critics, with the Nintendo Switch version earning a weighted average of 67 based on 5 critics.

=== Season 1 (2015–16) ===
===="Episode 1: The Order of the Stone"====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 71/100 based on 25 reviews, 77.50% for Wii U based on 4 reviews, 73.53% for the PC version based on 16 reviews, and 73.29% for PlayStation 4 based on 21 reviews.

===="Episode 2: Assembly Required"====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 59/100 based on 13 reviews, 
the PlayStation 4 version 67/100 based on 8 reviews,
and the Xbox One version 76/100 based on 4 reviews.

===="Episode 2: Giant Consequences"====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version 74/100 based on 8 critics and the PlayStation 4 version a score of 73/100 based on 4 reviews. On GameRankings, the PlayStation 4 version has a rating of 65.00% based on 2 reviews and on the PC version, it has a score of 72.86% based on 7 reviews.

===="Episode 3: Jailhouse Block"====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version 71/100, based on 8 reviews, and the PlayStation 4 63/100 based on 4 reviews.

===="Episode 4: Below The Bedrock"====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version a score of 74/100 based on 5 critics.

===="Episode 5: Above And Beyond"====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version a score of 78/100 based on 4 critics.
